Hi everyone, well, for this week's episode of No Six Thing as a Fish, where we were joined by our good friend
and erstwhile colleague, Amila.
That's right. And Miller, not just a QIL these days, not just a brilliant producer, but a children's author.
Yes, she has a new book out. It is called The Monster Diaries. What's it about Andy?
It's about the Cyclops and the worst party ever. It's a telling of the Cyclops myth from the Cyclops's point of view,
which is a very funny and good idea. Turns out Odysseus is a complete prat.
And the Cyclops is the one who should be the hero of the story, but has been mistreated by history,
so Anne is setting the record straight. I gotta say it's an amazing book. My daughter has been swimming
in it for the last week. She can't help but sit down as she's been asking for it to be read to her
every bedtime. I know other kids will love it too. And it's a part of a trilogy, so there's two more
on the way. If you want to subtly get brilliant bits of history and mythology into your child's brain,
this is the way to do it. Yes, that's right. And if you have a very big brain yourself,
and you would like to show people how big your brain is, then guess what? You have a chance to do so
this coming week because we have our next No, since things are fish. Quiz night.
Yes, if you're a member of Club Fish, or the friend of the podcast here, you can come to our
online quizzes. The three of us have been beavering away, writing questions. I am getting a costume
for my round. I haven't told you guys this yet. It's ordered. Is it a beaver costume? It's not a beaver
costume. It's so much worse than that. But basically, it's an enormously fun night. You can join as
a team with friends or family, and it's all done over Zoom, so we will send you a link and you can
just join. It's going to be on. Is it the 14th of April? That's right. 2026. Yep, this year.
And it's at 7 p.m. UK time. So go to patreon.com/clubfish. Look for that friend of the podcast here,
and then you will be able to join us and see if you can pit your wits against other fish fans.
Okay, on with the podcast. On with the show.
Hello and welcome to another episode of No Such Thing as a Fish, a weekly podcast coming to you
from the QI offices in Hobern. My name is Dan Schreiber. I am sitting here with James Harkin,
Andrew Hunter Murray and Ann Miller. And once again, we have gathered around the microphones with our
four favorite facts from the last seven days. And in a particular order, here we go. Starting with
fact number one, that is Andy. My fact is, the author of Ben Her dedicated the book to his wife,
but he accidentally made it sound like she died. And when he tried to fix it, made it sound even more
like she died. So this is Lou Wallace, who wrote Ben Her, which was one of the biggest books of the
world in, it was out in about 1880. I think it was the biggest selling novel of the 19th century.
Until gone with the wind, I think. And it's a Roman epic that also takes in the birth of Jesus,
of the life of Jesus. It's a bit like the life of Brian, but it's serious. It's huge though. For
many people, it was the first fiction they'd ever read. It was, it just sold so many millions of copies.
It's like the modern version of the Davinci code, 50 shades of grey, Ann Miller's New Park. Yes,
it's all of that. It's all of that. Do you have, um, let us see in your zone? No,
always adds 50% to say anyway, I should say this was sent in by Amber O'Rand, so thank you very
much, Amber. It's a terrific fact. Basically, Wallace was married to his wife Susan and he said,
"I'm going to dedicate the book to you. What would you like?" And she chose the wording to the wife
of my youth. Only my youth. A lot of people read that as, oh, that's so sad. She passed away,
you know, some years ago, out of the wife of my youth. And he wrote, "I began to receive letters of
sympathy and inquiries as to when and of what poor Mrs. Wallace died. She was alive and well."
And he got so many, I think he started getting marriage proposals by people saying, he's single.
You're right, so go book. Yeah. And he had to go back and he asked his wife to help him fix it.
So later copies read, "To the wife of my youth who still abides with me." Oh my god,
he had things that he was like, as she lives on in my heart. Not like the world's most famous
funeral song as well. But yes, just to my wife. To my wife, to my wife, who's here right now,
she's looking great. She's never looked better. Here's the problem. It's a great novel. He's written
this great novel. His wife is only doing one little bit. His wife has done the dedication both times
and she's messed it up twice. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. She had a long job. But she's played a long game in
terms of PR because now she's on those things of fish. Oh yeah. Susan Wallace. Susan Wallace.
She's still alive. Well, she outlived him by a couple of years. She was a writer as well and I read
that she came up with a phrase, "The Pastor of Little Feet" in her poem. Oh, that's huge. That's huge.
And people will know that more than Ben Hurr. So it's pretty snappier, isn't it? Yeah, yeah, yeah.
It's quicker. It was a big book. I mean, there's no doubt that this was a huge, huge moment in
literature. It supposedly was blessed by Pope Leo the 13th. That's a story that goes around.
It was one of the first books that was turned into a braille book. That's a big book. Oh wow.
That's a big braille. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. You get tired fingers. Yeah, and it was, it was what?
You would get tired fingers, yeah. And tired eyeballs for meeting it because it is a monster book.
Tired is, if you listen to the audio. Did you see it as one of the first big merch
tions as well? So his son was a businessman and he licensed it to all sorts of things. You could get
Ben Hurr cars, bicycles, cigars, Ben Hurr soup, Ben Hurr perfume, and Ben Hurr flower.
As in stuff you make cakes with? Yeah. Wow. I also read you could get Ben Hurr and Ben
his bathroom towels stuff. Very good. I didn't think they had his and her stuff in the 1880s,
but I'm wrong, really. I think the merch that I'm talking about came after the movie came out,
and so the movie came out in the 50s, didn't it? Yeah, the Charlton Heston version,
the like real colossal famous one, you know. But there have been four films. I've got four films.
One was at the first one MGM ever made. Yeah, the first was in 1907, which was 15 minutes long,
which at the time was an epic. Oh my god. I'm going to have to go for a wee play time. 15 minutes.
And they didn't get the rights to it. They just made the film. So all prints of that film by law
were destroyed except one. There was only one print left. Then there was a 1921, which was very
faithful to it and they got the rights. And then yes, the 1959 one is a very famous old Hollywood,
you know, Swords and Sandals epic. Yeah. Charlton Heston plays Ben Hur in the movie,
um, Judah. And in Greece, it was not starring Charlton Heston. No, sorry, John Travolta. Yes.
Yes. Anyway, just a little fact there for you guys. Two different people it turns out. Anyway,
so in Greece, they released this with another actor. No, it was still Charlton Heston, but he was
built as Charlton Heston. And the reason is it's because in modern Greek, Pesto means to shit yourself.
Yeah. It's a dedication to driving a chariot that far. That's amazing. That's wild.
I read that the film got the 111 Academy Awards, which is like the most anyone who got
until Lord of the Rings, the third one that also got 11 and both books, Papa Collins books.
Interesting. Oh, what are you trying to say? Yeah. This is a woman in publishing, you know?
Could you name any other Harper Collins books? Yeah. All the theory of everything else by
Dan Chriver. Also, Darius, by Emily. That was, yeah, an imprint, Mudlark of Papa Collins.
The really nice thing about the film versions is that there's a guy who directed the chariot race
in the 1925 movie, assistant director, it's called William Wiler. He directed the 1959 film.
He worked his way up from assistant chariot race director to overall film director.
But the 1959 film is the only Hollywood movie ever to make the Vatican's approved list of films.
Really? If you're having a Vatican movie night, yeah, Vatican approved movie night.
Yeah. Yes. You can only watch one Hollywood film and it's been heard.
It's the only one. It's still to this day. I don't know if they've updated the list.
I should write to them. I should write to them. So why are the other ones on there then?
There's dude wears my car too. Not dude wears my car one.
But that's Hollywood as well, right? So what, I mean, is it like European...
Oh, I like educational films. It can be a load of boring, boring stuff,
wouldn't it? Yeah. What if it's literally just been her?
When I was in primary school, we had one video to record every wet play around the time.
We all watched Mrs. Doubtfire, but only the first 50 minutes.
Wow. Why only the first 50?
Because I remember those. Because I remember those. So I didn't see the second half,
but I was like 20. So...
They're both the same guy?
Flip my mind. I'm not kidding. We watched the same 50 minutes everywhere, right?
I'm like presumably you went to school in Scotland, right?
So if you guys, it would be like a documentary.
I was after school childcare. How was the accent?
The problem of millions.
I liked it.
Okay, so can we talk a little bit about Lou Wallace?
Oh, yeah.
And you're nothing about him.
Very, very interesting fellows.
So he started writing this book after basically being button-hold on a train by an agnostic
for some time.
Why do you mean button-hold?
Sorry, it's like where someone grabs your lapel and just talks at you for ages about something.
I think I'm hot, you know.
So he was on a train with another soldier. He was a soldier in the Union Army in the Civil War,
in the Civil War, and he got talking to this soldier called Colonel Robert Ingersolfer,
ages and ages, who was quite a well-known agnostic speaker about, you know,
delts about the existence of God.
And he just seems to have written a huge epic religious novel off the back of this conversation,
saying, "Just to piss him off, then."
Seems like it.
Yeah, yeah.
And it was read by so many famous people.
So, friend of the podcast, I would say first and closest friend of the podcast.
Robin Thickey.
[laughter]
Um, who?
President James Garfield.
No, he was a very well-read man.
Well, he had time at a time when he was lying around.
Did you read about the job he gave him?
No.
So, apparently, President James Garfield.
So, while he was President, he loved Ben Hurr so much.
And this, I wish people empowered him this more often.
He wanted to read the sequel so much that he gave Louis Wallace the job
of ambassador to the Ottoman Empire based in Constantinople,
in hope that being there would make him inspire him to write a sequel.
Oh, oh, wow.
That's so cool.
That is so cool.
But he didn't write a sequel.
He didn't write a sequel.
He was probably busy being the, it's not like a big job.
Like, the ambassador to the Ottoman Empire.
That's a huge guy.
I imagine Donald Trump's done the same with Eric Karl to try and get him to do it.
Very hungry cataclysm, let's say.
[laughter]
I'm irreverent.
But this guy's life is absolutely incredible.
He's basically kind of like the nearest comparison,
like, and think of it as like the Joel's brand-wreffs of his time.
Because he--
Oh, my god, he's going to love that.
He did everything.
So he, when Abraham Lincoln was assassinated,
he was one of the people who investigated the Kochan Sparitors.
He was a general in the Civil War.
He was sent and made territorial governor of New Mexico,
which is where he wrote Ben Hur.
Then he wrote the book.
And then he did some deal with Billy the Kid that went wrong.
So he had people going past his house and shooting at his candles
while he was trying to write.
Because they were so cross with him that said, "Go on south."
Sorry, hang on back up.
Billy the Kid's people were shooting at his candles.
They had to stop him writing.
That's pretty cool.
I mean, I don't think they were that good at shooting in those days.
I know they were good.
I like it.
To be able to shoot a candle.
Yeah, you've got calamity Jane who can do that.
But that's about it.
I don't think--
How do you shoot a candle?
Oh, you just aim for the top, don't you?
No, but how do you not accidentally kill Louis Wallace
in the process?
I think they wouldn't have minded.
Yeah, OK.
Well, he did end up having Billy the Kid arrested, which is--
Think what happened with Billy the Kid.
Am I wrong about this?
But I think what happened was, believe the kid was an outlaw.
And he said, well, I'll pardon you.
Come back and we'll let bygones be bygones.
And maybe you can tell us about some of your accomplices.
But then he kind of lost his power a little bit.
And the other people who were in charge said,
oh, we're not going to agree with that deal anymore.
Billy the Kid then went to prison.
So I think he was like a deal that he did,
but then he wasn't in a position to honor it.
Interesting.
And I think that's then the reason
that Billy the Kid's people were so upset with him, I think.
Right, right, right, right.
That makes sense.
Like, what a lie.
What a lie, if he made his own violins, Louis?
OK.
He patented eight inventions.
One of them was a retractable reel inside a fish in a rod handle.
This guy--
That's useful.
Very useful.
I was looking at the website of his study,
which he built to play the violin in, is now a museum.
And on the website, they've got these FAQs.
So they're like, oh, did he really go back on his word
to Billy the Kid?
Did he really not Abraham Lincoln?
But one of the questions is, did Louis Wallace
really invent the snooze button?
And the answer is, no.
It says, we're not sure how this rumor got started.
Oh, it sounds frequently asked.
Is this question bravely?
Well, yeah, every nine minutes.
I feel like with what we've heard about him,
that doesn't sound out of place.
He invented.
He did invent things.
Yeah, but that's not the snooze button.
And then there's this lovely quote from him
where he said, let's read the whole thing,
because it's beautiful.
He says, I would not give a tapence for the American
who has not tried to do at least one of these things.
Paint a picture, write a book, get a patent,
or try to play a musical instrument.
That is the genius of the true American
in those four art, literature, invention, and music.
Well, it's easy for you to say.
You're a multi-award winning genius inventor.
Military, laser, presidential writer.
Did he produce any other major work,
"Council to Ben Hur?"
He wrote the big biography for Benjamin Harrison
while he was running for president, because--
Ben Hur?
Ben.
[LAUGHTER]
He should have called him that.
Because there wasn't really much--
there wasn't, you know, like a TV news circuit you could go on.
So to get to know the candidates, they pushed these books,
and he wrote Benjamin Harrison.
It was such a good job.
It was like the book about him for like 70 years,
but with the wrong title.
[LAUGHTER]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
OK, it is time for fact number two, and that is Anne.
My fact is that, as well as more famous Greek gods,
like Poseidon and Zeus, there was also
Chiomites, the God of Beans.
Yeah, man.
Mm.
Fantastic.
What would be your job as God of Beans just making sure?
Counting them like a--
There's very little known about Chiomites, I should say.
So we think specifically the broad bean,
and we think he may have hung around with Demeter,
who was the goddess of agriculture, but he's quite mysterious.
Do you get kind of junior--
because like in the government, you have a main
semester of transport, but then you have the minister of buses,
who's-- it's got a smaller brief, obviously.
Is it the same kind of thing?
You have a god of-- the big deal, like god of war,
and within that is a goddess of archery, or something?
I would say yes, but with a lot more having sex with your sister.
No, we don't know what the minister of buses gets up to.
That's what one of the buses is about.
So there's not much to read about this guy, Chiomites,
but Posseinius writes, "I cannot state for certain whether he
was the first to sow beans, or whether they gave this name
to a hero because they may not attribute it to Demeter,
the discovery of beans, whoever has been
initiated in Elyusus, or has read what I call the offiker,
knows what I mean."
[LAUGHTER]
And it's such--
We don't know what that means.
It's so mysterious.
But Andy's kind of-- it kind of is like a government.
Set up.
So you have-- basically, you're like 12 Olympic gods
live on Mount Olympus, and there's kind of two grips.
There's Zeus and his siblings, and then there are his children,
and there's some crossover.
And so you have Zeus, who's married to hero,
who is his sister.
They have some children.
They also have his sister, Demeter.
They also have a child, and then there are his children
so that you got like Athena, Aphrodite, Hermes.
But again, with Greek mythology,
because the stories were told so often in different places,
there's different versions of everybody's parentage.
So Aphrodite's one is brilliant, because there
are one version of that she's Zeus's daughter, but not heroes.
So far so straightforward.
The other telling is that her father
was a different god, Uranus, god of the sea.
Sorry.
Uranus, god of the sky.
And in that version of the story--
Proper pronunciation, Andy.
In that, come on out.
Come on out.
Because of what's coming next.
And in this version, his testicles were cut off
and thrown into the sea, and Neopathos in Cyprus.
And the resulting foam led to the creation of Aphrodite.
And her name comes from the Greek Aphros, which means foam.
But there are very famous paintings of Aphrodite
coming out of the sea and being born.
And so that's why I can tell, no testicles in the paintings.
OK.
OK, that's what I'm saying.
Is that the same as the birth of Venus?
Yeah.
Where she's on the shell.
But the full meme.
Oh, yes.
I find it all very difficult to keep in my head.
You know how many it's like, you get it in quiz questions
and stuff like that, it always comes up.
And I've often tried to learn how everyone's related
to each other, but it's so difficult to hear.
It matches together, and it changes.
And there's different versions.
Even the 12 Olympian gods, there's
different 12s, depending on who you talk to.
They're kind of like Zeus was always there,
but some of them vary around a little bit.
And it all starts slipping into each other.
That's what?
[LAUGHTER]
Aphrodite, we've mentioned, the goddess of love.
She just has an interesting entourage of junior gods
around her.
There's Eros.
There's Hermaphrodetus.
And there's Hyman, the god of marriage.
But there are various other-- I'd like this kind of very
junior level gods.
So there's more gods is Terry Pratchey, of course.
Hedilogos, god of sweet-talking.
Nice.
Sweet-talking.
Yeah, right, first thing.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Chat.
Good chat.
Bents.
Top, but hot-bents.
But Aphrodite, he has another very interesting thing
that she gave the world, because she
may have been the first mother ever to slipper her child.
As in, like, thrash with the slipper.
I really?
There's a vase from 360 BC, which depicts Aphrodite, giving
naughty little Eros as spanking with the slipper, which
is obviously, that's become, you know,
that was a staple of things like the B-No.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
With the slipper.
It feels like, you know, when you have a bad moment,
you think, so I hope nobody saw me do that.
I'm just having it painted on the bottom of the pages on her.
Have you seen the latest vases?
No.
We did something ages ago, which was about Pythagoras
and his--
Pythagoras.
Yeah, and his fear of beans.
Does that connect to it in any way to the fact that--
I think it might be connected in some way
in that the reason that he didn't like beans
is because some people thought they had the souls of dead people
in them.
They were definitely associated with death.
And they were offering that you would give if someone had died.
And so for that reason, they were obviously
important in society.
And when something was so important,
they might have a god associated with them.
Yes.
I didn't-- that's what--
And they also had sort of like deities.
They weren't specifically like gods,
but they like sort of had special powers for certain areas.
So there was Horkas, who personified the curse on those
who make a bad oath.
He would sort of call to him, and then somebody--
Momas is from mockery and satire.
There's a whole bunch of like--
I love Momas.
Momas is the bastard child of night.
Momas was thrown out of Olympus eventually
for hanging around making unhelpful comments.
[LAUGHTER]
Who sounds like we could be--
I dare you.
Sounds like your patron saint.
I didn't think-- oh, wow.
The class clown hasn't--
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So I get quite confused about how people in ancient Greece
experienced all this.
Yeah.
What was the day-to-day life like with all of these gods?
I know they had individual temples and some major ones
and some smaller ones.
But I just wanted to do a little quiz question for you guys.
When was the last temple built to the Greek gods?
Oh, there's probably still people around who believe in it.
So I would say 2025.
Yeah, I don't think that's very likely.
But to play along with your game, let's say it was--
500 BC.
Yeah, 100 BC.
Thank you.
May 20, 25.
This morning.
It was in 2025.
[LAUGHTER]
Oh, damn.
Was it?
Yeah.
It's in the Peloponese, and it was the idea
of a doctor called Manelis Heliotis, who has 150 acres of land.
It's a proper temple.
It's marble.
Cool.
For a specific gods or for a whole event?
It-- do you know what I don't know?
It sounds like a tax break to me.
It's very-- to the god of life, obviously.
Yeah, yeah, ask me one.
It opened on the 8th of March, the same birthday
as no such thing as a fish.
Oh, that's awesome.
That's the day of this.
Yeah.
It was illegal to worship Zeus until 2006.
Yes.
In fact, any of these lot.
If you wanted to do a Kaya Mitis festival,
then that was no can do.
But then in 2006, and Athens Court decided
that you can do this kind of pagan worshipping.
Because before that, you could only be, I think, an Orthodox
Christian and one or two other things were allowed.
But yeah, then they came in.
And then there were censuses.
And the US State Department in 2006
reckoned there were 2,000 followers of the ancient Greek religion.
Although people who do that, they reckon
the numbers more like 100,000, who still believe in those--
Really?
I mean, it's in their interest to pump up the numbers right now.
But it's not like a thing of saying you're a Jedi, which
was all the censuses.
No, it's a few censuses as I said.
It's more like being a wicker, I would say.
Or like, you know, sorry to the wickers listening,
because I know people get that wrong a lot as well.
But it's worshipping the old gods, which definitely
are people in the UK who do that.
And the Greek Orthodox Church are very down on this sort of thing.
They were very against this temple.
Yeah, they were very hostile to it.
And they set up a regression to a dark world.
Right.
Gosh.
So Uranus, who didn't pronounce properly before then,
is that the only planet that we have that is named
after a Greek god?
So this is where it gets confusing.
Because generally, the planet names
are the Roman versions of the gods.
So Aphrodite becomes Venus, but Neptune
is Roman because the Poseidon is the Greek currency in Neptune.
Jupiter's Roman.
Saturn's Roman.
Yeah.
But Uranus is the only one that's slightly--
Seems to be both.
Pluto is the dog.
Yeah.
Running around barking a lot.
Mercury is the lead secret of Queen.
Yeah.
Would you like some fun ancient Greek etymology?
So the word tantalising is from Greek myth.
I didn't know this until very recently.
It's a myth about King tantalists.
And he was punished by Hades made him stand in a river
up to his neck in water.
And he wasn't allowed to eat her drinks.
So if he moved to get the fruit trees above him,
the trees would move.
If he moved to drink the water, the water would move.
So he was always trying to get food or drink.
And he couldn't.
But would you like to know why he was punished by the gods?
Oh, yes.
He did three things.
Can we guess?
You can try.
He stole grapes.
Yeah, kind of.
He stole nectar and ambrosia.
That's a pretty wild first hiprate.
Next one, the two and three.
Is he smacked the wrong child with a slipper?
He had sex with Osora goddess naked.
That often happens.
That's a good one.
I mean, they're not a million miles off.
So the second one is secrets.
He told secrets he'd overhear, just that he shouldn't have.
And the third one is a worse version of the slipper.
He killed his son and served him to the gods
to test their powers of observation.
And they did not like this.
How was he serving him?
I think in a stew.
Oh, that's impossible to tell.
A stew.
That's a lot going on.
Is this chicken?
Is this pension?
Is this your son?
I don't know.
The God of Beans is going though.
What?
Me?
Is this in?
Guys, something's up.
I said we should all be vegetarians.
That's really interesting.
Because tantalises, so I was looking at the things we covered at ages ago, that there are various
financial houses named after Greek gods.
It's a really common thing to do to make your rubby little hedge fund sound like it's been
around for 2,000 years.
You know what I mean?
But Olympian Handlings.
Exactly.
Jupiter investments.
Yeah.
All of this stuff.
Sorry.
It's when the hedge fund is listening.
If you want to sponsor an episode, we're very happy to do that.
But there's a very niche one.
It was an amazing article by Thomas Fedorek, who spotted there's Eurichlayer Partners.
Okay.
Right?
And I'd never had a Eurichlayer.
And Eurichlayer is a minor character in the Odyssey.
And this is actually, I think, the best named financial institution you could have named
after a character from ancient myth.
Because in the Odyssey, Odysseus gets home 20 years later, where have you been, all that.
But there are loads of chances living in the house trying to check his wife, basically.
Okay.
And she is putting them off and saying, "My husband's going to be home any minute."
Yeah.
But it's been 20 years.
And it's wearing increasingly thin.
Oh god, if snooze buttons go in, I can be nine more minutes.
So when Odysseus is on his way home, he will be killed by all the chances who, you know,
sort of like young warlords trying to try to get with his wife.
So the goddess Athena disguises Odysseus as a tramp.
So he won't be killed on sight, right?
So he can get into the house and suddenly throw off his costume and win the prize and reclaim
his wife and all of this.
One is fooled by the sight of this tramp, except Yuri Claire, who is an elderly servant living
in the house.
And she is the one who spots a familiar scar on his thigh and says, "You're Odysseus."
How does she know his thigh so well?
Well, good point.
Good point.
But she observes him and it means she can, you know, she can buy stocks in Odysseus, basically.
So I think that is a terrific, like she has the insight based on good market knowledge.
So I think that is a fantastic name for a financial organisation.
Okay.
Do you know what my hedge fund would be called?
Yeah.
Mine would be called Epimetheus Holdings.
Okay.
Because Epimetheus was the god of afterthought and excuses.
And he was the brother of Prometheus.
So Prometheus in this story creates humans and Epimetheus creates all the other animals.
But he's so sort of stupid and just really impulsive that he puts all the best bits on
all the other animals.
So he puts the wings on the eagles and he puts the humps on the camels and the trunks
on the elephants.
And all the best bits were then.
So the humans just get a shitty little human thought.
Oh.
That's so funny.
Thank you.
So should we have had humps and wings?
We should have had humps, but in the end only the black eyed piece had to happen.
Okay, it is time for fact number three.
And that is my fact.
My fact this week is that the greatest ever treasure trove of original American comic strips
was discovered in a naval warehouse by a man called Blackbeard.
Oh.
That's so cool.
That's a great name.
He's a William Blackbeard.
This was a guy who really is credited by people within the community of comic books in
America.
As single handedly the reason that we have all the original source material from, you know,
the 30s onwards.
He made it his mission to track down and find all the original newspapers.
So he would go around to people's garages, you know, and he would just say, do you have any
old newspapers?
And often they did.
And he would cut out the comic strips and he would log them.
And so he kept this huge archive.
And he was having to do it very slowly.
And then eventually he discovered that the Library of Congress had six acres of naval warehouse
in Virginia.
And it was where they were housing all of these newspapers that went back to the 19th century.
And so he suddenly thought, great, they're safe.
But then it turned out that they were getting rid of them because they thought, are they
going to deteriorate?
So they were photographing, making microfilm of them, and then they were going to toss
them away.
Now the issue for him was if you'd make a microfilm of comic strips, they're in black
and white, they're no longer in color.
And so he did a deal and he was able to extract them all.
And as a result, saved all the originals of these things.
So he's a real hero in that community.
That's really cool.
Did he have to cut out the strips individually or did he keep them as like full papers?
No, he just kept them out.
I don't know if he did that for every single one.
Because that's for every paper that's...
You can't keep the whole paper.
That's why they were in warehouses.
These huge sets of papers and all he wanted was one tiny strip of paper.
So we should say, yes, this is comic strips, not comic books.
Exactly.
It's not a first edition.
Superman.
It's a first edition...
Garfield.
So something like 2.5 million clippings that he managed to get hands on.
His hands on...
They're still going through the archive.
So there's a couple of Instagram accounts where they show latest findings.
I saw one the other day of a poster of Charlie Brown, which they were really excited because
it's, you know, it's it's original.
Yeah.
So yeah, a huge, huge hero to this community.
I guess people didn't realize what they had.
Like you need somebody to...
Like every book, the British library takes a copy.
Yeah.
You need a system to store the comics and something like that guy set up and...
Him and his wife, he just did it.
He just set up his own company and...
That's so cool.
Yeah.
Which he had to do, I believe, otherwise they wouldn't give it over to him because he wasn't an
institution.
Yeah.
Like resources.
And are people like using this resource now?
Yeah.
It's kind of the main archive that is used for any comic book history.
He wrote a lot of books as well off the back of it.
Did he?
Yeah.
He printed the strips, didn't he?
So look, here are a load of peanuts, cartoons.
I think he did lots...
I think...
Probably sold it a bit better than that.
I think I already did a lot of, like, consultancy work for people who wanted to know what was
in the comics who would have found out stuff because he knew them all so well.
Yeah.
So I guess he was like...
He was like, "Let the go to a comics book guy."
Yeah.
The reason I was thinking is, like, "What use is it to have this stuff?"
A lot of medical knowledge in there.
A lot of, like, ancient lost secrets.
By a frame, pun twice.
Yeah.
Then you get your memory back.
Yeah, yeah.
Just culture history.
It's culture history.
Yeah.
When do people start wearing braces?
Well, let's look at this into the addition of Fred, the dog, or whatever it is.
Yeah.
There's a lot of debate about when comics began, because obviously they became big in the
20th century in a really big way in newspapers, really.
What about hieroglyphs?
Well, you've just outgunned my early bed, which was for the biotapistry.
Oh, yeah.
Comic strip?
Is it a comic strip?
What about like the cave paintings?
I've seen cave paintings where it appears like one thing comes after the other one.
Oh, yeah.
That's a good one.
Cave comics.
There's some comic strips of the oldest medium.
There we go.
When were you going to say the Bayer?
Yeah.
To have a strip.
Because that is sequential though, isn't it?
The Bayer Tapestry.
And it's a strip.
It is.
It's coming here.
We're going to get it in the UK.
We're so excited.
There are some vases, which are technically a kind of animation.
I know.
They're not as old as the cave paintings, but there are some ancient Persian vases.
This is really cool.
I've never heard of Iran's burnt city.
It's unfortunate timing now, but there is a place called the Burn City, which is an ancient
historical site.
They found a bowl in there, which was 5,200 years old.
And it's got these five images on it.
And if you spin the bowl, it shows a goat jumping up and grabbing some leaves from a tree.
Oh, cool.
And then the animation.
It's like a zootrop.
The thing you spin round and round and the animation repeats itself.
Wow.
That's the right thing.
I've seen it.
They've rendered it into an animation like that.
So that's like the original flip book, as opposed to comic strips.
Yeah.
You're right.
That's very cool.
Do you know where the word cartoon comes from, or when it was first used in the UK?
Hmm.
Shake it there.
No, after that, it was 1843, and it referred to some things in the houses of Parliament.
Mmm.
Ooh.
So they'd recently put some murals in there.
Yeah.
And the word cartoon, at that time, meant like a little sketch you would do on cardboard
before you did your big painting.
So if you're in Italy, for instance, it was an Italian word.
So let's say Leonardo da Vinci wants to do the last supper, but first he's going to do a
little scribble on his shredding's box.
Like, to get all the spacing right.
Yeah, to get all the spacing right and stuff.
So that was an Italian word, and then the magazine punch used the word to refer to these
murals in the houses of Parliament that people were able to go and see.
And then it became kind of a visible thing, because it was a comedy magazine.
And then they started using the word cartoon to refer to their political cartoons.
Oh, that's cool.
Which became big around that time as well, and that's why we used it today.
Wow.
So interesting.
I have another Italian word.
The Italian for a comic strip is Fometto, which means literally a little puff of smoke, and
it's named for the shape, the little speech bubbles you get in comic strips.
Oh, you did.
So beautiful.
I think it's pronounced Fometto, F-U-M-E-T-T-O Fometto.
Fometto.
But it's a little clouds.
It's very beautiful.
That's wonderful.
I was looking into a few of the major comic strip creators of the 1930s onwards in America.
I mean, when circulation was like, you know, it was getting 34 million readers a day because
it was syndicated to all the newspapers.
So these people were amongst the most red in America at the time.
Elsie Cigar, who we've mentioned before, he's the creator of Popeye.
This guy died quite young.
So he did about nine years worth of Popeye, but the cultural impact that it had is massive.
Most of the illustrators who came after like Charles Schultz and so on, hold this guy up
as one of the great geniuses.
Okay.
So that stuff is kind of obvious, but it had an even bigger impact that I didn't realize,
which is that Popeye was meant to be Mario.
So in Japan, when Mario was first made, it was never meant to be Donkey Kong and Mario.
It was meant to be Pluto and Popeye, but they couldn't get the rights to it.
So they had to change it so that it became that.
So we could have been playing Popeye cards, you know, these days.
But actually it was cool.
Yeah.
That's, it was just simply your rights issue and they had to pivot into making it something
else.
So the necessity is the mother of invention.
I read that during the Great Depression, it made Spinach consumption go up 33%.
As the American children named it one of the top three favourite foods after ice cream
in Turkey.
Wow.
Spinach.
Really rebranded Spinach.
That's some believable branding for Spinach, isn't it?
Yeah.
That's quite the bronze position on the podium.
And there have been a lot of concerns about comics over the years and I'm speaking here
more about comic books rather than comic strips.
No one's ever been made depraved by Garfield in the paper, but there were a lot
of worries in the 1940s.
There were even some comic book burnings that happened.
So a lot of editorials which said they were a national disgrace.
One American critic called John Mason Brown described them as the marijuana of the nursery.
I know.
There was a big work in 1954, seduction of the innocent by it.
That was Frederick Wortham, right?
Yes.
He was a child psychologist who did a lot of good in his career, you know, ensured that
a lot of poor or mentally unwell people got fair trials, helped fight mental illness in
children.
But he had a big being in his bonnet about comics.
He decided they were evil.
He decided that Batman and Robin were an item, which was less socially acceptable in the
40s than it was today.
Well, they weren't an item.
They absolutely weren't.
I think he was seeing what he wanted to see that he decided Superman was a fascist, very
much not the point.
And he basically thought they should all be a 15 certificate blanket, no exceptions.
So we have slightly mentioned him before.
Yeah.
But what I didn't know about him is he did this sort of like comic box a terrible thing.
And then a load of right wing people started giving him money because they really liked
the fact that he was trying to censor cartoons and stuff.
But on the side, he was an anti-racism campaigner.
And the light you say, he was running clinics for mental health and stuff like that.
But specifically, he was running them in Harlem, which had a very, very high African American
population, and he was really helping those communities.
And so all the money from these right wingers that they thought was going to kind of ban
porcupig or whatever was actually going to help these hospitals.
It's not cool.
It's funny.
That's very cool.
Yeah.
It led to this thing called the comics code, which had all these rules, like if crime is
depicted, it should be as assorted in unpleasant activity.
No learied unsavory or gruesome illustrations, no walking dead torture vampires, ghouls, cannibalism
or werewolfism.
Guess what?
Yeah, this code lasted until...
20 seconds.
2100 BC.
Thank you James.
It was 2011.
Wow.
Final members of this code, people gradually, like comic book makers gradually fell away from
it.
But the final members kept going until 2011.
Do you still get that a bit today where like in a movie, it's quite rare that you get
a film where people do something bad and they don't get caught for it or they don't get,
you know, you don't get to come up and somehow, do you know what I mean?
It's quite unsatisfying when you watch it and people don't get caught.
Yeah.
Oh no, you were talking about werewolves and all that kind of stuff.
In 1954, in Glasgow, there was a vampire hunt.
And this was basically a load of kids were going around Glasgow trying to find vampires.
And eventually it led to the Children and Young persons harmful publications acts of 1955,
which banned the sale of comic books with, you know, evil characters in it.
And what they thought was that people had been reading comics with vampires and had decided
to go around cemeteries attacking people.
But people pointed out that actually there were no vampire comics around that time.
No one had read any.
Right.
They couldn't point to the one that these kids had been reading.
But there is a monster with iron teeth in the Bible in Daniel 7/7, which had been mentioned
in local schools around the time.
And what they think happened was they'd heard this story from the Bible.
They thought, let's go and find that person.
And then the police had said, oh, they're looking for vampires.
But it did lead to an actual act of parliament.
So it's sort of excess Sunday school is what they're saying.
That's what it seems to be.
Yeah.
So I was reading about Sidginers' lovely fact that there were two Dennis the Menace cartoons
launched on the same day.
Oh, yeah.
So there's Scottish one and the American one.
But I didn't realize that they think that the reason that happened at the same time was
there's a really popular musical song called Dennis the Menace from Venice.
OK.
Which I never heard that before.
So it was so Dennis the Menace.
So they may have heard that song and then it was sort of like a catchy name.
They developed it.
I mean, it's still, it's stuck him out on the exactly the same day on both sides of
the Atlantic.
Which is absolutely wild.
In the same.
But not that insane if two years earlier there was another character with that same day.
Yeah.
It's really real.
I still find it hard to get my head around.
I still think that must prove something.
I don't know what it proves.
Simulation theory.
Yeah.
I mean, Dennis the Menace, we should say.
Which one?
British one.
Back and red.
Spiky hair, dog-court naturally, all of that.
Yeah.
Doesn't, of course, get slippered anymore.
Does he know that?
No.
If you buy the Bina these days, it's very rare to end with corporal punishment.
Which I just sort of accepted when I was reading it as a child.
But that was the thing that would happen was that you get slippered, yeah.
Your grumpy, moustacheo dad would hit you with a slipper.
Yeah.
And that was.
That was normal.
And it never did us any harm.
Yeah.
Do you know that in Dundee, we have our big statue in the town centre is desperate, Dan.
Is it?
Is that so?
Yeah.
There's a many of the makes next.
Oh, that's very cool.
Because that was the other thing we've mentioned that on the show.
The meat pies that he would eat.
Yeah.
They got changed into vegan pies for a while as well.
Cow pies.
Cow pies, sorry.
Yeah.
They were changed into veggie.
And this is my son in here.
Hi.
It was my observation test.
So.
Oh, here's a tiny, tiny, fun detail.
Scrooge McDuck was invented by a man called Carl Barks, the long centre of the person.
Oh my.
It sounds like a cartoon of a socialist dog, doesn't it?
Why?
Why don't we all share the bone?
It's so funny.
Okay, it is time for our final fact of the show.
And that is James.
Okay, my fact this week is that naked mole rat toilet cleaners have no hope for promotion.
It's a tough enough gig being a naked mole rat and it's a tough enough gig cleaning toilets
for a living.
But being a naked mole rat and cleaning toilets for a living does feel like you've drawn
a bit of a short straw.
Are they only cleaning naked mole rat toilets?
Yes.
Good question.
Well, that will take a really long time to do like King's Cross Station.
That's such a good point.
So this is naked mole rats.
I think one of the poster boys of QI over the years, we love naked mole rats.
They're hardworking, they're hideous looking.
They live in Africa where we don't.
And they live on the ground and there was a recent study from the Journal of Science Advances
that showed individual naked mole rats perform specific duties for their colony.
Okay.
There's digging, transporting garbage, cleaning the toilets because they have all these tunnels
and some of the tunnels are used for pooing and winging and the team from Kumamoto University
in Japan, they put RFID chips in some of these naked mole rats, you know, like the ones you
get in your oyster cards or whatever or in your credit cards.
And they managed to monitor these naked mole rats over a certain period and found that they
never changed their job.
So what they think is that basically once you're a toilet cleaner, you stay as a toilet
cleaner.
It's still early days whether this is completely right because it was quite a short survey,
but that's what they think.
They are absolutely hideous looking.
Oh, we're talking about the scientists from Kumamoto University.
But we should say, if you've never seen a naked mole rat and you're listening to this,
do have a little Google because they just are not classically fit animals.
They live on the ground.
I know they've got bad, so it doesn't matter, is that what you're just saying?
How does she look?
I have no idea.
But they've basically got their naked, they've got this sort of wrinkly nude flesh.
They look like a sausage with teeth, is what the scientists work on them say.
But would you eat that sausage?
No.
I'd have to have gone a long time without a sausage to consider it.
I wouldn't take that off the barbecue first.
But especially not these guys, they have such amazing superpowers.
So we think they don't feel pain, they can survive 18 minutes without oxygen, but they can
do so many cool things.
They are so good.
But I wonder, by the way, if the toilet cleaners are also partial chefs, because I hope they're
washed their paws.
Well, naked mole rats, they eat each other's feces, and the queens, they have a queen, which
is an amazing thing.
I mean, it's queen of the toothed sausages, you know?
I think queen is putting it a bit strong, actually, that's very unfair.
They probably wouldn't find you very attractive, and the absolute.
They would be like, can he survive for 18 minutes without oxygen?
Harry Stickman, can this guy shut his lips behind his teeth?
No, he can't.
Yeah.
But yeah, the queen, though.
Well, the queen, yeah, she has particular hormones in her droppings, so they'll eat the queens
to get, you know, sustenance and so on, but yeah, so I wonder if the toilet cleaners are
sort of going, hey, let's eat this stuff.
I feel like I read that by eating the poo, they sort of learn, like, how the best to protect
her and what she needs, which are in the details.
Actually, she can fire her estrogen out in the poo, they think.
So when she has babies, she gets a whole lot of estrogen in her body, some of it obviously
goes out in the poo, the other naked mole rats eat it, and they get estrogen in their body,
which makes them better parents, so they can all look after the children together.
They live in colonies, where there's one sexually active female who's the queen.
There are a couple of sexual males, and then there are workers, and it's between like
14 and a few hundred workers, but the queen suppresses the sexual instincts of almost everyone
else in the colony.
Yeah.
Most adults don't even develop genitalia, you know, all the females have sealed vaginas, the
males have immature sperm that could not penetrate the neck, and that's thanks to the queen
being in position.
Well, because the queen, it is Game of Thrones-y, like the queen isn't born queen, they fight
to find who the next queen is, yeah, so it's like a bloodbath, they're just killing
each other right until the point where the female mole rat becomes pregnant, and then that
becomes the queen, and they just kill the females with the most estrogen and just fight and
kill each other until one of them establishes enough dominance.
And then they start giving birth, and then it's an amazing process, so the first time they
get birth, it's between one and ten naked mole rat babies, pups, pups, but then every time
they get birth, their body stretches, it's like you've pulled them a bit longer because
their spinal column stretches, which means they can hold more poison than to get birth.
So they end up being able to get birth to 30, and they get pregnant every few months.
They're insane.
They're the most insane, I can't believe it, they've been taking us 12 years to cover naked
mole rats.
Every time I find the naked mole rat fights, I just think, oh, we've probably done them
before.
Yeah, I know.
A lot of their brain apparently is devoted to their teeth, because it's one of the main
ways they experience the world is through their teeth, because their teeth are right out
in front, they're digging a lot, and that's why they close their lips.
And they feel with them.
I don't know, I don't know if they can probably sense vibration through them, I think so.
They're really good diggers.
One quarter of their muscle mass is in their jaws to close their jaws while they're digging.
They can run backwards as fast as they can run forwards.
Very, very slowly.
Is it slowly?
Totally.
I think they can, I think they can whizz around their tunnels, but they live in these
huge colonies, like the area of a football pitch, let's say, but with thousands of meters
of tunnels underneath.
Just imagine looking down on a football pitch from underneath and seeing these sausages firing
themselves around through the soil in all these zigzag patterns.
That are the watch the football match for you, I imagine.
One of the things they do, by the way, when they're running backwards, and I guess forwards
as well, is they use their hair.
So we call them naked mole rats, but they do have hair.
And they're kind of like whiskers.
They're very, they're very soft, very thin, but they're kind of like how cats use their
whiskers as sensory items.
So as they're running through the tunnel, they have tail hair and they have body hair.
There's a lot for them to sense where they're going.
Can we talk a bit about them and air?
So Anne briefly mentioned that they don't really need air in the same way that we do.
By oxygen.
They're crazy.
Yeah.
Because they're tunneling underground all the time.
They can go for ages and ages in a tunnel, which is, let's say, 5% oxygen.
Well, normal air is, what is it, 21% oxygen.
There's a lot of ground air, classic air, it's 21% oxygen.
Original, full fat air.
But they can live underground in these tunnels, which have very low oxygen content and they're
fine.
They've been experimented on it.
They can live for 18 minutes with no oxygen, which will kill any human.
Any human.
That's what David Blaine did about that.
You get, you do get those people who can hold their breath for about 20 minutes.
Yeah.
What?
And I think we said that world record for holding your breath was like 23 minutes or something.
Okay, you're right.
You guys are right.
But I would just say, if unless you've done a lot of training, 18 minutes with oxygen, it's
going to be bad for you.
Absolutely.
But related to that as well, did you read that when they sleep, they like to sort of sleep
all together in a big pile, like all 300 of them.
And they think that because they're all breathing out, they basically kind of like blanket themselves
in carbon dioxide, which has the effect of reducing seizures.
And the paper I read said very clearly, this is only for naked moirats and the one
else is to try this as a treatment.
But there's some reason that they think it sort of slows down their brains and it sort of
protects them.
And even if you give them a big space, they will clump together.
And they described as it's like building a luxury resort and having all of your guests
choose to sleep in the same room closet.
Yeah.
Naked as well.
And now say, I've got a few whiskers and I'm really naked.
You were talking about the oxygen and how they survive with little oxygen.
So I don't really quite understand this, but the way it works is our bodies.
We use glucose as energy.
And that glucose system in your body requires oxygen to work.
But when they have no oxygen, they switch to fructose based system.
Right.
I don't really understand this, but apparently fructose doesn't require oxygen.
So you can still get the energy going around your system, but you don't need the oxygen
as well.
And that's how plants work.
That's how plants get energy around them.
But no other mammal has ever been found that uses this system.
That's the faunt system.
They are very cool.
It's in the missing link.
It's the in the fossil record between plant and human and the underground.
So maybe there's like hanging out with the plants.
That's world.
Can I ask?
I know you said you didn't understand it, but the idea of them doing a thing that only
plants do.
Yes.
Is that one of the most interesting biological things that we've ever noticed?
Like, is this the great mystery of I don't know, I didn't get a massively good response
in this room.
Oh, you kidding?
It's insane.
It's insane that they have--
Everything they do is.
Yeah.
It's insane they have two operating systems, one for backup, which no one else has.
There are other naked mole rats, I think.
What is it?
The damar or a land mole rat?
There are a few others.
But yeah, they're very weird.
The damar or land ones are quite interesting because they have basically two different types
of that mole rat.
Half of them are really, really hardworking and industrious, and the other half are fat
and they don't really do any work.
But those are the ones that do the mating, apparently.
So the busy ones do 95% of the work, but the lazy ones do almost all of the reproduction.
Do they?
That's so unfair.
I know.
That's life, isn't it?
I'll say it's exactly what happens in naked mole rat holdings.
How do you have time to make this show when you have so many businesses on the fly?
Every one of them is making a massive loss.
We should say who first described them scientifically, it's quite interesting.
There's a German scientist who was called Edward Ruppel, and he traveled around a lot sending
samples and animals and specimens back to Frankfurt, which is where he was based, various
things, and named after him, there's Ruppels, Busted, Ruppels, Gryffin, Vulture, Ruppels,
Rass, the fish, you know, anyway, when he found the naked mole rat, he thought this
is so hideous, this must be a diseased or a mutated individual from another species.
The main thing cannot look like this.
Ironically, it doesn't really get diseases.
No, you're so right.
You're so right.
Yeah, yeah.
God, is that what we're going to look like if we're truly healthy?
That's true, actually, if you get all these squillian-ass who are trying to make themselves
live forever, they all do end up looking a bit like a naked mole rat.
Okay, that's it, that is all of our facts, thank you so much for listening.
If you'd like to get in contact with any of us about the things that we have said over
the course of this podcast, we can all be found online, I'm on @Streiberland on Instagram,
James.
I, my hedge funds, can all be found on LinkedIn, come and jump you in there, James Harkens,
my name.
Andy, my Instagram's Andrew Hunter M, yeah, and Anne.
My Instagram is @millerbooks, yeah, and don't forget, it says books at the end of her handle
because she has just released her kids book, which is called Monster Diaries, it's a retelling
the Greek myths from the Monsters point of view, this one's the Cyclops, yeah, so it's called
Monster Diaries, the Cyclops and the worst party ever, it's part of a trilogy, so there's
two more coming out, so get it now, it's going to be out very soon, and if you want to get
through to us, by the way, podcast@QI.com, we get all your emails there and he goes through
them, if you're going to send us an interesting fact, that might make its way to our bonus episode
that comes out every Monday called Little Fish, if you want to send us an interesting experience
of something that's related to something we said in an episode, and he might pick that
out for drop us a line, which is our mail bag episode, now that's a secret show, you can
only listen to that show if you join Club Fish, that's a Patreon thing, so check out patreon.com/clubfish,
there's so many fun things going on there, it's turned into a real amazing community, so
go see if you want to join that, and otherwise why not just come back here next week, because
we're going to be back again with another episode, and we will see you then, good bye!
[Music]